---
title: "Introduction"
teaching: 5
exercises: 10
questions:
- "What will we learn here?"
- "What are the major themes in parallel computing?"
objectives:
- "To introduce what the ACENET Summer School will be covering"
keypoints:
- "The summer school will introduce several key concepts in parallel programming"
---

The ACENET Parallel Programming Summer School will focus on teaching students the basics of parallel programming. This will include lessons in shared memory programming (through OpenMP), message passing parallel programming (through MPI) and GPGPU programming (through CUDA).

The intention is to teach these topics in an intensive, hands-on, format to try and cover the essentials of each technique. The hands-on sections will hopefully provide tangible experiences to anchor the ideas in your memory.

Each afternoon will be devoted to working on larger problems. Ideally, you will have brought problems from your own research area to work on, with assistance from the instructors.

## Thinking in parallel

Pretend it's the days before electronic computers, and you have been assigned the task
of computing the sum of 1,000 four-digit numbers as rapidly as possible.
You hold in your hands a stack of 1,000 index cards, each containing a single
number, and you are in charge of 1,000 accountants, each with a pencil.
You may choose to use the services of any number of these accountants. 
The accountants are sitting at desks in a cavernous room. The desks are organized
into 25 rows and 40 columns. Each accountant can pass cards to the four
accountants nearest her--- in front, in back, to the left, and to the right.
- How many accountants should we use?
- How will we get the cards to right accountants?
- How will we turn the subtotals generated by the active accountants into a grand total?
- What should we do differently if there were 10,000 numbers (but still 1,000 accountants)?

This thought experiment introduces the major themes of parallel computing:
Calculation (adding), communication or data movement (passing cards), and the balance between
them. These themes will come up again and again in the next few days.
 
(Adapted from Michael J. Quinn, ["Parallel Programming in C with MPI and OpenMP"](https://www.amazon.com/Parallel-Programming-Openmp-Michael-2008-01-01/dp/B01F81TFD8/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1496073113&sr=8-2&keywords=Michael+J.+Quinn%2C+%22Parallel+Programming+in+C+with+MPI+and+OpenMP%22))
